 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
1 
Natural England Standard     
SSSI Regulation 
1:0 About this standard 
Introduction 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) safeguard England’s most important areas of natural 
heritage. The Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981 and subsequent amending legislation1 (referred to in this 
document as ‘the Act’) places a legal duty on Natural England to act for the benefit of SSSIs and take 
reasonable steps, consistent with the proper exercise of its functions, to further the conservation and 
enhancement of the special scientific interest of SSSIs2. 
In order to provide all SSSIs with protection from potentially harmful activities, the Act 
requires: 
• 
owners and occupiers of SSSI land proposing to carry out or permit operations that 
may damage the special interest of their SSSI to first apply for Natural England’s 
consent.  
• 
public bodies proposing to carry out operations which they consider are likely to 
damage the features of special interest within a SSSI (whether within or outside the 
boundary of an SSSI) to first apply for Natural England’s assent  
• 
public bodies proposing to authorise or permit others to carry out operations that may 
be likely to damage the special interest of a SSSI (whether within or outside the 
boundary of an SSSI) to first seek Natural England’s advice 
What does this standard cover? 
This operational standard, which is informed by Natural England’s SSSI Strategic 
Standard, explains the guiding principles that Natural England applies when exercising the 
legal powers given to it by Section 28 of the Act with regard to: 
 
• 
Consents (section 28E of the Act) — issued in response to a written notice of 
proposal from an owner or occupier of an SSSI. Natural England may grant consent 
for the proposed operations, with or without conditions, or refuse to grant consent for 
the proposed operations if it considers that the proposal is not compatible with 
furthering the conservation and enhancement of the SSSI. The operations that require 
 
1 The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 was amended by the Countryside Rights of Way Act 2000 and the Natural Environment and Rural 
Communities Act 2006. 
2 Section 28G of the Act 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
2 
Natural England’s consent (also previously referred to as ‘Operations Likely to 
Damage’ (OLDs)) are formally listed in the notification documents of each SSSI and 
are relevant to the notified features for which that SSSI has been selected.  
• 
Assents (section 28H of the Act) — issued in response to a written notice of 
proposal from a public body, such as a government department or agency, local 
authority or statutory undertaker3, requesting permission to undertake operations, in 
the exercise of their functions, which that authority considers is likely to damage a 
SSSI. On determination of the notice, Natural England may grant its assent, grant its 
assent with conditions or refuse to grant its assent if it considers that the proposal is 
not compatible with furthering the conservation and enhancement of the special 
interest of the site. 
• 
Advice (section 28I of the Act) — issued in response to a consultation from a public body 
when it is deciding whether to authorise or permit an operation proposed by others. This is 
the case whether they may permit the operations following an application required by a 
statutory authorisation regime, or whether they are acting as a SSSI landowner and wish to 
permit a third party to carry out operations on their SSSI land. Natural England may advise 
against giving permission for operations that may damage the special interest of the site or 
advise that conditions be attached to a permission to prevent or mitigate the operations 
causing damage. 
The diagram in Annex 1 illustrates the three regulatory pathways (consents, assents, and 
advice) applied by Section 28 of the Act to help protect SSSIs. GOV.UK provides further public 
guidance4. 
Who is this standard for? 
This standard has a wide audience. It is essential that the owners and occupiers of SSSIs understand 
the regulatory pathway for consent decisions under Section 28E and that public bodies understand the 
regulatory pathway for assent decisions under Section 28H and for statutory Section 28I advice.  
It will be useful for other parties to understand how to gain the necessary permissions that may be 
required when proposing to undertake events or activities on SSSI land owned by owners, occupiers, or 
public bodies. 
 
 
 
3 Examples include Environment Agency, Forestry Commission, Local Authority, utility companies, Ministry of Defence, Network Rail and 
Highways England 
4 There are two pages of public guidance that relate to the process through which SSSI owners and occupiers can give notice and apply for a 
consent decision, and the duties of public body responsibilities: Sites of special scientific interest: managing your land - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) 
and Sites of special scientific interest: public body responsibilities - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
3 
2:0 The Standard 
Natural England is committed to working closely with land managers and others (our SSSI customers) 
who wish to submit notices and seek advice concerning SSSI regulation.  
Our aim is to ensure we respond to all enquiries in a timely and efficient manner and that we explain 
the reasons for our advice and decisions clearly.  
In implementing our legal duties, we will apply the following principles: 
1. 
Ensure that customers can easily access the information on individual SSSIs that Natural 
England uses to inform its decision making 
In addition to directly providing these to owners, occupiers and public bodies when a SSSI is first 
notified, Natural England publishes the statutory notification documents for each SSSI on its website5.  
These are important references in the decision-making processes affecting SSSIs and comprise: 
• 
A Citation, which describes the special nature conservation interest for which the site has been 
selected as a SSSI 
• 
A Map showing the extent of the SSSI boundary 
• 
A List of Operations that require Natural England’s consent (‘ORNECs’) (also previously referred 
to as ‘Operations Likely to Damage’ (‘OLDs’), and 
• 
A Statement providing Natural England’s views about the management of the land which is 
necessary to conserve the SSSI. 
2. 
Encourage customers to discuss their proposals with us before submitting a notice 
We encourage our SSSI customers (owner/occupiers and public bodies) to contact us prior to 
submitting a notice to undertake activity affecting a SSSI. Owner/occupiers should only consult where 
the proposed operation equates with an operation which is described in ‘the list of operations requiring 
Natural England’s consent’ for their SSSI and where the proposed operation would be carried out within 
the boundary of the SSSI.  
Public bodies should consult Natural England where they consider that an operation would be likely to 
damage the features of special interest, whether the operation is to take place within the boundary of 
the SSSI or not.  By discussing proposed operations in advance of the submission of a formal notice, 
both parties can consider at an early stage if and how the work can be undertaken in a way that 
protects the special feature of the SSSI. 
Natural England can provide informal advice to an owner or occupier or public body about any 
proposed operations before a notice is submitted. Once notice has been given and a written proposal 
submitted, Natural England must then assess the likely ecological impacts of the operations as 
requested and described in the notice. Further dialogue with the applicant during this statutory 
determination period is limited to requests for additional information to inform the decision.  
Should the owner or occupier or public body choose to significantly change their submitted proposal, 
they can withdraw their notice at any point and Natural England can provide further advice to help 
 
5 https://designatedsites.naturalengland.org.uk 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
4 
inform a new notice. 
Natural England’s initial advice to SSSI customers will usually be free but in some circumstances, 
Natural England may charge for its advice under its pre-application Discretionary Advice Service (DAS). 
This can be especially helpful to SSSI customers if detailed advice is needed on avoidance of damage, 
mitigation strategies to reduce damage to the environment, or if advice is required quickly (in less than 
28 days). DAS contracts6 must be agreed in advance of the advice being given and are particularly 
relevant for proposed operations that are not necessary for the conservation of the site. 
3.  Adopt an approach to our decision making on consents and assents which seeks to find 
solutions whilst ensuring the protection of the SSSI 
Natural England will, as far as practicable, seek to identify workable solutions that both protect the 
features of special interest of the site and support the legitimate activities of landowners, land managers 
and public bodies.  
When making its decisions, Natural England will assess whether it is possible to carry out the 
operations identified as likely to damage a SSSI in ways that are compatible with furthering the 
conservation and enhancement of the special interest of the site, for example by using certain methods, 
or at specific times of year, or on certain parts of the SSSI.  
Where it is not possible to grant our consent/assent to a proposed operation, Natural England will, 
where practicable, work with land managers and public bodies to explore alternative solutions or 
proposals to achieve similar outcomes, which would enable a consent/assent to be granted in future. 
4. Respond to SSSI notices from owner occupiers of SSSIs in a timely and efficient manner 
A notice must be drafted by a notified owner or occupier (or someone authorized to act on their behalf) 
and should be submitted in writing to Natural England’s Single Point of Contact at 
protectedsites@naturalengland.org.uk. Natural England will acknowledge the receipt of a notice with 
an automated reply email.  
Annex 2 details the information that Natural England generally recommends should be included in a 
notice. Providing sufficient information about where, what, when and how the operations would be 
undertaken if permitted can help to ensure a timely decision. If we consider the correspondence 
describing proposed operations cannot be recognised as a notice, we will respond as promptly as 
possible, providing an explanation, for example where a notice is submitted by a third party.  
On receiving a notice Natural England will first check for any existing consents which already authorise 
the proposed operations. This will prevent the unnecessary duplication or ‘layering’ of permissions and 
allow previously consented operations to proceed quickly subject to the acquisition by the SSSI consent 
holder of any other permissions from other bodies. Natural England will inform the applicant if they 
already have a consent for the operations that they have proposed. 
Under the provisions of the Act, Natural England has up to four months from the date on which the notice 
was sent to Natural England in which to determine a Section 28E notice. Natural England will however 
strive to respond to notices within 28 days. For complex cases, where a site visit and/or specialist 
 
6 You can find further information about Natural England’s DAS at https://www.gov.uk/guidance/sites-of-special-scientific-interest-public-body-
responsibilities#get-free-or-charged-advice-from-natural-england 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
5 
advice is required, the whole of this statutory period may be required.  
More complex cases can include proposals affecting those SSSIs which are also part of the National 
European Site Network7 because Natural England will also need to undertake a ‘Habitats Regulations 
Assessment’ to inform its Section 28E consent decisions. In circumstances where the Habitat Regulations 
Assessment indicates that a more detailed ’appropriate assessment’ is required it may take up to four 
months to reach a decision (see principle 6). Natural England must also ensure that its SSSI consent 
decisions do not hinder the conservation objectives for Marine Conservation Zones. 
Where Natural England concludes that the proposed operations would, if carried out, cause damage or 
disturbance to the notified features of a SSSI, it may be necessary for Natural England to attach 
conditions to a consent to prevent or mitigate such damage or disturbance or refuse to grant consent. 
Where consent is granted with conditions, or where consent is refused, then a statement clearly 
explaining our reasons for doing so will be provided.  
The applicant will be informed about their right to appeal against such decisions to the Secretary of 
State and how to lodge an appeal if they choose to. 
5. Respond to SSSI notices from public bodies in a timely and efficient manner 
A notice should be submitted in writing to Natural England’s Single Point of Contact at 
protectedsites@naturalengland.org.uk. Natural England will acknowledge the receipt of notices with 
an automated email reply. 
Public bodies should provide sufficient information about where, what, when and how the operations 
would be undertaken to enable Natural England to make a decision. Where the SSSI underpins a 
European site, there is an expectation that public bodies include a copy of their Habitats Regulations 
Assessment (as required by the Habitats Regulations 2017) that informed the development of their 
proposed operations. 
Under the provisions of the Act, Natural England has 28 days from the date on the notice to determine a 
notice for assent. On receiving a notice at the Single Point of Contact, Natural England will first check 
for any existing assents that may already authorise the proposed operations. This will prevent the 
unnecessary duplication or ‘layering’ of permissions and allow previously assented operations to 
proceed quickly. Natural England will inform the public body if they already have a permission for the 
operations that they have proposed. 
Statutory bodies requiring assent for their operations have the duty to conserve and enhance the SSSI’s 
special interest whilst exercising their functions. Where proposals do not meet with this duty, Natural 
England will inform that body as soon as possible and, where practicable, explore whether there are 
other ways in which their operations can be carried out that are more compatible with furthering the 
conservation and enhancement of the special interest of the site. 
Where Natural England concludes that the proposed operations would cause damage or disturbance to 
 
7 Sites within the National European Site Network are Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) and Special Protection Areas (SPA) designated by 
Government under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended). Wetlands of International Importance (Ramsar 
Sites) designated under the terms of the Ramsar Convention are also subject to the provisions of the Habitats Regulations as a matter of 
Government policy, although they are not legally a part of the National European Site Network 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
6 
the notified features, it may be necessary for Natural England to grant assent with conditions or refuse to 
grant its assent.  
Natural England must also ensure that any SSSI assent decisions do not hinder the conservation 
objectives for Marine Conservation Zones. 
6. 
Provide clear advice to public bodies in relation to our duties to support their decision 
making 
When a consultation for Section 28I advice has been submitted to the Single Point of Contact mailbox at 
protectedsites@naturalengland.org.uk, Natural England will acknowledge receipt with an automated 
response email.  
Local planning authorities should submit their requests for advice on planning applications to 
consultations@naturalengland.org.uk. 
Natural England will respond within 28 days of the date on a notice from a public body seeking our 
advice about whether an operation should proceed on a SSSI. Our response letter will state whether we 
consider the proposed operation to be compatible with furthering the conservation and enhancement of 
the special interest of the site.  
If we believe that this duty could be met by applying conditions, then our advice letter will include our 
reasons for this and further details about the required conditions which the public body should set 
when granting its permission. We will clearly explain the advice we have given, drawing on the best 
available evidence to determine what the potential impacts might be and if they might be mitigated. 
If a consultation does not provide adequate information, we will communicate this as early as possible to 
allow further details to be provided.  
7. Work with public bodies who decide to proceed contrary to Natural England’s assent 
decision or advice. 
Before a public body decides to proceed with operations without Natural England’s assent, or grants 
permission for operations contrary to our advice, it is required by the Act to give Natural England further 
written notice (at least 28 days if proposing to carry out their own work or 21 days if proposing to permit 
an operation). This notice should include an explanation of how it has considered any advice previously 
provided by Natural England.  
Where a public body decides to act contrary to Natural England’s advice, it is required to demonstrate 
how it has weighed the balance between differing interests, including the special interest of the SSSI. It 
should also demonstrate how it has considered alternative methods of carrying out the operations to 
minimise adverse impact. Should the public body proceed and carry out its own operations that are 
likely to cause damage, it must restore the site to its former condition, so far as is reasonably 
practicable, if any damage does occur. 
Where Natural England remains concerned about the significance of the likely impacts on a site’s 
notified features, it may consider taking further action, including a referral of the case to the Secretary 
of State. 
8. Ensure that SSSIs which are also designated as part of the National European Site Network 
series are subject to the requirements of the Habitats Regulations 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
7 
Where the SSSI is also designated as a European Site (i.e. a SAC or SPA), the Conservation of 
Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) (“the Habitats Regulations”) places additional 
obligations on Natural England when considering applications for SSSI consent.  
If, in our judgment, a proposed ‘plan or project’ (including a notice for SSSI consent) is not ‘directly 
connected with or necessary for the nature conservation management of the site’ and is ‘likely to have 
a significant effect’ on the site (either alone or in combination with other plans or projects), then it is 
mandatory that an ‘appropriate assessment’ of the proposal is undertaken to thoroughly assess the 
likely ecological impacts in more detail. Consent can only be granted by Natural England if it can be 
concluded following that assessment that the plan or project will not have an adverse effect on the 
integrity of the European site8.  
Under the Habitats Regulations, a ‘competent authority’ such as a public body must undertake its own 
Habitats Regulations Assessment to inform decision making in relation to any ‘plan or project’ that it 
wishes to undertake or adopt itself or is required to authorise.  
9. Base our decisions on the best available evidence and the likely impact of the proposed 
operation on the site’s notified features 
Natural England will consider whether each proposal is compatible with furthering the conservation and 
enhancement of the special interest of the site in accordance with its statutory duty. In undertaking this 
assessment, we will follow our Evidence Standards and use the best available evidence and our 
professional expertise and judgment.  
A key part of our evidence base will be the SSSI citation and associated documentation to identify the 
interest feature(s) that could be affected by a proposal. Staff will determine proposals and reach a 
decision considering the conservation objectives for that SSSI and the scientific evidence available 
about the ecological requirements of the affected features, together with their local knowledge of the 
site, professional expertise, and practical experience. This will be informed by specialist advice and 
opinion where required. 
Where there is evidence that a previously consented activity is no longer compatible with furthering the 
conservation and enhancement of the special interest of the SSSI, Natural England can use its powers 
under the Act to modify or withdraw an existing consent. This is subject to a right of appeal if the 
consent holder is aggrieved by that decision and compensation may be payable where the consent 
holder can show that the changes to the consent will result in a loss in the value of the SSSI land. 
10. Record all decisions to create a clear audit trail 
All notices received by Natural England will be recorded on our casework management system and all 
associated documents including unconditional, conditioned, and refused consents/assents, and advice 
to public bodies will be stored in accordance with our Records Management guidance. 
 
11. Ensure all decisions are made on a case-by-case basis and adhere to current procedures 
governing our decision making 
 
8 See Natural England’s Habitats Regulation Assessment Operational Standard: http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/publication/8740045  

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
8 
All notices of proposal submitted by SSSI owner/occupiers for a consent decision or by public bodies 
for an assent decision will be treated by Natural England on their own merits based on the detail of the 
proposal provided in the notice and its predicted impacts in relation to the SSSI’s notified features. The 
granting of a consent/assent, the refusal of a consent/assent, or the attachment of conditions to a 
consent/assent on one SSSI does not in itself set a wider precedent for others. 
Our staff will abide by Natural England’s Non-Financial Scheme of Delegations9 for issuing consents, 
assents, and advice. The Scheme describes the individual decision-making authority that Natural 
England staff have in relation to their role and grade and highlights when decisions are required to be 
agreed and endorsed by a more senior officer.  
12. Ensure that our staff have the appropriate training and support to undertake our 
responsibilities regarding consents, assents, and advice 
All staff with responsibilities for determining consents, assents, and advice notices for SSSIs will have 
received the appropriate ecological and SSSI training and have access to up to date guidance and 
support. 
 
 
9 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/975871/natural-england-non-financial-
scheme-of-delegation.pdf 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
9 
Annexes 
Annex 1: Consent (Section 28E), Assent (Section 28H) or Advice (Section 28I) 
The first step is to determine the type of notice or consultation 
 
Public body - Section 28G bodies are broadly 
defined in the Act, but specifically include the 
Secretary of State, government departments 
and agencies, local authorities and statutory 
undertakers (whether in the public sector or a 
privatised utility), and other officers appointed 
by the Crown. Examples include: Environment 
Agency, Forestry Commission, Local Planning 
Authority, Utility companies (water or 
electricity). MoD, Network Rail  
Permitting – where a public body has the power 
to grant a Permission for others to undertake 
works, e.g. EA abstraction licence, or a Local 
Authority planning permission, situations where 
a public owns land and wishes to permit a third 
party to carry out operations, situations where 
a public body intends to serve a notice under 
any regulatory regime. 
Third party/member of the public - A notice of
proposal can only be submitted by an 
owner/occupier of the SSSI. 
Where it has been confirmed that an agent is 
acting on behalf of an owner/occupier, they can 
submit a notice 
Members of the public would need to seek the
permission of the owner/occupier who in turn 
would need to seek consent. 
Undertaking – a public body carrying out its 
functions, e.g. EA undertaking flood defence 
works, or a Local Authority maintaining a right of 
way. 
Function – this is a broad definition that includes 
all the duties and powers of a public body 
including any activities it has the power to 
perform. 
Who is consulting 
Natural England? 
Public body 
(Section 28G body) 
Is the proposed operation part of the 
public body’s function(s)? 
SSSI owner or 
occupier 
Consent 
(Section 28E) 
Third party or 
member of the 
public 
Is the public body 
permitting the 
operation? 
Is the public body 
undertaking the proposed 
operation? 
No 
Yes 
Assent 
(Section 28H) 
Advice 
(Section 28I) 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
10 
Annex 2: A recommendation as to the information that might be included in a notice of 
proposal for proposed operations requiring SSSI consent  
Owners/ occupiers (or their nominated agents and representatives) and public bodies are required to 
submit a notice of proposed operation in writing, either by letter or email. Whatever form a notice takes, 
it must specify the nature of the proposed operations and the land on which it is proposed to carry it 
out.  
The recommended information that should be included in a notice, and a template for writing a notice, 
are both available online from the GOV.UK page ‘Give notice and get consent for a planned activity on 
a SSSI’.  
For Natural England to determine a notice, we need sufficient detail to be able to make a judgment on 
the impacts of the proposals. 
The following information should be included:  
• 
site name 
• 
name and address of applicant 
• 
a clear and detailed description of what you intend to do, and how you intend to do it 
• 
the start and end dates for the operation or activity 
the precise location of the proposed operation or activity (send a map with notes if you can)  
You should include as much relevant information about your proposal, such as: 
• 
what if any vehicles will need access to the site, the routes they’ll take and ground pressure 
they’ll exert (particularly across fens and bogs) 
• 
how you’ll remove any spoil from the site 
• 
the origin and chemical nature of any materials you’ll bring onto the site  
Natural England may contact you if it needs: 
• 
more details about your request 
• 
to clarify any issues about your request 
 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
11 
Annex 3. Glossary 
Term 
Definition 
Occupier 
The occupier is someone who, although lacking the title of an 
owner, nevertheless stands in such a comprehensive and stable 
relationship with the land as to be, in company with the actual 
owner, someone to who the mechanisms can sensibly be made 
to apply 
Owner  
A person, other than a mortgagee not in possession, who, 
whether in his own right or as trustee or agent for any other 
person, is entitled to receive the rack rent of the land or, where 
the land is not let at a rack rent, would be entitled if it were so let. 
Section 28E 
This is the section of the Wildlife and Countryside Act (1981) as 
amended that places the obligation on SSSI owner/occupiers to 
give notice to Natural England about proposed operations and 
provides the mechanisms through which consent decisions are 
made, either to grant consent, grant consent with conditions, 
refuse to grant consent or withdraw or modify a consent. 
Section 28G 
This is the section of the Wildlife and Countryside Act (1981) as 
amended that places a general duty on all public bodies (referred 
to as ‘section 28G authorities’) to take reasonable steps when 
exercising their functions to further the conservation and 
enhancement of SSSIs.  
Section 28H 
This is the section of the Wildlife and Countryside Act (1981) as 
amended that provides the mechanisms through which assent 
decisions are made, either to grant assent, grant assent with 
conditions, refuse to grant assent  
Section 28I 
This is the section of the Wildlife and Countryside Act (1981) as 
amended that provides the mechanism through which a section 
28G authority must give notice of proposed operations to Natural 
England before permitting the carrying out of operations likely to 
damage any of the flora, fauna or geological or physiographical 
features by reason of which a site of special scientific interest is 
of special interest. 
Third Party 
In this instance, a third party refers to any individual or 
organization that is not a notified owner or occupier of land within 
an SSSI, and is not a public body 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
12 
Quick reference 
 
Document Amendment Record 
Issue Amendment detail 
Author 
Date 
0.1 
First draft 
Lydia Speakman 7.11.12 
0.2 
2
nd draft following scoping call 
Lydia 
Speakman/ 
Tim Frayling 
28.11.12 
0.3 
Draft incorporating Lydia Speakman, 
Steve 
Clifton and Phil Eckersley comments 
Lydia 
Speakman/ 
Tim Frayling 
23.1.13 
0.4 
Revised following conversation 
between Lydia 
Speakman and Tim Frayling 
Lydia Speakman 24.1.13 
0.5 
Revised following comments from 
Simon 
Stonehouse & Rebecca Moberly 
Lydia Speakman 13.2.13 
0.6 
Revised following detailed comments 
by 
Jonathan Pearce to improve its 
accessibility 
Lydia Speakman 11.3.13 
0.7 
Revised to include comments from 
Steve 
Clifton and Kay Shuard 
Lydia Speakman 26.3.13 
0.8 
Revised to include Janette Ward 
comments 
and LM adviser user testing feedback 
Tim Frayling 
5.6.13 
1.0 
Revised to include Brad Tooze 
comments 
Tim Frayling 
11.07.13 
2.0 
Revised to include comments from 
Ken Roy 
and Tim Frayling 
Jonathan 
Pearce 
23.09.13 
Type of Standard 
Operational standard.  
Purpose: 
To set out and explain the regulatory principles and 
mandatory requirements for Natural England to follow when 
making decisions in relation to notices for consent and 
assent, and consultations for advice, relating to Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) 
 
Owner(s): 
Programme Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries  
Sign-off: 
Principal Adviser Protected Sites Team and Principal Adviser 
Legal Services Team 
Publication: 
Evidence Catalogue – external version 
Review date: 
November 2024 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
13 
Issue Amendment detail 
Author 
Date 
2.1 
Incorporating final comments from 
Janette 
Ward and Ian Fugler, confirmed by 
Tim Fraying 
Jonathan 
Pearce 
07.10.13 
2.1 
Published 
KH 
07.10.13 
2.1 
Published in 2014 template. No 
changes to content 
KH 
26.08.15 
3.1 
Revised to reflect (a) the EU Exit 
amendments made to the Habitats 
Regulations in 2021; (b) legal 
clarifications; and (c) the availability 
of Natural England’s Discretionary 
Advice Service. Links to GOV.UK 
guidance pages updated.  
Richard 
Leishman with 
advice from 
Helen Gill, Steve 
Clifton and 
Katherine Tonge 
07.10.2022 
3.2 
Submitted to content owner for sign 
off and re-published 
Steve Clifton 
14.10.2022 
3.3 
Resolution of formatting and 
accessibility issues 
Alice Shaw and 
Richard 
Leishman 
27.02.2023 
3.4 
Published externally  
Alice Shaw 
16.03.2023 
3.5 
Corrected email address error 
Lauren 
DeGrange & 
Steve Clifton 
24.01.2024 
  
 
Copyright 
This document can be downloaded from the Natural England Access to Evidence 
Catalogue.  
It is published by Natural England under the Open Government Licence v3.0 for public 
sector information. Natural England images and photographs are only available for non-
commercial purposes. 
© Natural England 2023 
