1
Protection of wild birds, their nests and eggs. S
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, if any person intentionally [F665or recklessly]—
(a)
kills, injures or takes any wild bird;
(b)
takes, damages [F666, destroys or otherwise interferes with] the nest of any wild
bird while that nest is in use or being built; or
[F667(ba)
at any other time takes, damages, destroys or otherwise interferes with any
nest habitually used by any wild bird included in Schedule A1;
(bb)
obstructs or prevents any wild bird from using its nest;]
(c)
takes or destroys an egg of any wild bird,
he shall be guilty of an offence.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Part, if any person has in his possession or control—
(a)
any live or dead wild bird or any part of, or anything derived from, such a
bird; or
(b)
an egg of a wild bird or any part of such an egg,
he shall be guilty of an offence.
(3) A person shall not be guilty of an offence under subsection (2) if he shows that—
(a)
the bird or egg had not been killed or taken, or had been killed or taken [F668at
or from a place in Scotland] otherwise than in contravention of the relevant
provisions; F669. . .
(b)
the bird, egg or other thing in his possession or control had been sold [F670at
a place in Scotland](whether to him or any other person) otherwise than in
contravention of those provisions; [F671; or
(c)
that the bird, egg or other thing in his possession or control had been killed
at, taken from or sold at a place outwith Scotland and—
(i) that the act of killing, taking or sale would not, if it had been
committed in Scotland, have been in contravention of the relevant
provisions; or
(ii) that the bird, egg or other thing had been brought from the place
where it was killed, taken or sold in accordance with the relevant
regulations.]
F672. . .
[F673(3A) In subsection (3)—
“ the relevant provisions ” means such of the provisions of—
(a) the Protection of Birds Acts 1954 to 1967 and orders made under those
Acts, and

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
Part I – Wildlife
Document Generated: 2020-12-04