253
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
“(aa)
may be issued either to all persons, to persons of a class or to a
particular person ;
(ab)
may be subject to compliance with any specified conditions,”; and
in paragraph (c) of that subsection for the words from “a period” to
“shorter” there shall be substituted the word “such”.
Expenses of returning animals and plants to the wild
2
After subsection (8) of section 1 of the 1976 Act there shall be inserted the following
subsection—
“(9) Where, in the case of a live animal or a plant of any kind which is condemned
or deemed to be condemned as forfeited, the Commissioners of Customs and
Excise incur any expenses in connection with, or with a view to—
(a)
its return to the wild ; or
(b)
its being kept at premises (whether within or outside the United
Kingdom) which are suitable for the keeping of animals or plants
of that kind,
those expenses may be recovered, as a debt due to the Crown, from
the importer or intending exporter of the animal or plant or any person
possessing or having control of it at the time of its seizure.
In this subsection expressions which are also used in the Customs and Excise
Management Act 1979 have the same meanings as in that Act.”
Powers of entry
3
After the subsection inserted by paragraph 2 as subsection (9) of section 1 of the
1976 Act there shall be inserted the following subsections—
“(10) Any person duly authorised in writing by the Secretary of State may, at any
reasonable time and (if required to do so) upon producing evidence that he is
so authorised, enter any premises where animals of any of the kinds to which
Schedule 1 or plants of any of the kinds to which Schedlule 2 to this Act
for the time being applies are kept (whether temporarily or permanently) in
order to ascertain whether any of the animals or plants kept there have been
imported contrary to this section.
(11) Any person who wilfully obstructs a person acting under subsection (10)
above shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding £200.”
Power to modify Schedules
4
(1) In paragraph (c) of section 3 of the 1976 Act (power to modify Schedules) after the
word “conservation” there shall be inserted the words “in any area” and after the
word “endangered” there shall be inserted the word “there”.
(2) After paragraph (d) of that section there shall be inserted the following paragraph—
“(dd) to restrict the importation of animals or plants of any kind which appear to
the Secretary of State to be unlikely to survive for any appreciable time if
they are kept in the United Kingdom ;”.

254
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 10 – Amendment of the Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act 1976
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
Sale of certain animals or plants or their derivatives
5
(1) In subsection (1) of section 4 of the 1976 Act (offences to sell etc. things imported
contrary to section 1 or their derivatives) for the words “Subject to subsection (2)”
there shall be substituted the words “Subject to subsections (1B) and (2)”, after the
words “has in his possession” there shall be inserted the words “or transports” and
the words “and in the following provisions” onwards shall be omitted.
(2) After that subsection there shall be inserted the following subsections—
“(1A) Subject to subsections (1B) and (2) below, a person who sells, offers or
exposes for sale, or has in his possession or transports for the purpose of
sale—
(a)
a live or dead animal of any of the kinds to which Schedule 4 to this
Act for the time being applies or an egg or other immature stage of
such an animal ;
(b)
a live or dead plant of any of the kinds to which Schedule 5 to this
Act for the time being applies ; or
(c)
any part of or anything which derives from or is made wholly or
partly from anything referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) above,
shall be guilty of an offence ; but nothing in this subsection shall apply in
relation to anything falling within subsection (1) above or anything which
has been imported, or is a part of or derives from or is made wholly or partly
from anything which has been imported, before the passing of the Wildlife
and Countryside Act 1981.
(1B) Subsections (1) and (1A) above do not apply to anything done under and in
accordance with the terms of a licence issued by the Secretary of State ; and
subsections (4) to (7) of section 1 above shall apply in relation to a licence
issued under this subsection as they apply in relation to a licence issued under
subsection (2) of that section.
(1C) In the following provisions of this section “ restricted article ” means
anything falling within subsection (1) or (1A) above. ”
(3) In subsection (2) of that section after the words “subsection (1)” there shall be
inserted the words “or (1A)”.
(4) In subsection (5) of that section after the words “subsection (1)” there shall be
inserted the words “, (1A)”.
(5) In subsection (6) of that section after the words “references to” there shall be inserted
the word “hire”.
(6) After Schedule 3 to the 1976 Act there shall be inserted as Schedule 4 the Schedule
set out in Part II of this Schedule.
(7) After the Schedule inserted in the 1976 Act by sub-paragraph (6) there shall be
inserted as Schedule 5 the Schedule set out in Part III of this Schedule.

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 10 – Amendment of the Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act 1976
Document Generated: 2020-12-04