273
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
 
Cattleya trianae
 
Didiciea cunninghamii
 
Laelia jongheana
 
Laelia lobata
 
Lycaste virginalis var alba
 
Peristeria elata
 
Renanthera imschootiana
 
Vanda coerulea
Pinaceae
Abies guatemalensis
 
Abies nebrodensis
Podocarpaceae
Podocarpus costalis
 
Podocarpus parlatorei
Proteaceae
Orothamnus zeyheri
 
Protea odorata
Rubiaceae
Balmea stormae
Sarraceniaceae
Sarracenia alabamensis alabamensis
 
Sarracenia jonesii
 
Sarracenia oreophila
Saxifragaceae (otherwise known as
Grossulariaceae)
Ribes sardoum
Stangeriaceae
Stangeria eriopus
Ulmaceae
Celtis aetnensis
Welwitschiaceae
Welwitschia bainesii
Zamiaceae
Encephalartos
Zingiberaceae
Hedychium philippinense
[F632SCHEDULE 10A
DELEGATION OF APPELLATE FUNCTIONS
Textual Amendments
F632 Sch. 10A inserted (30.1.2001) by 2000 c. 37 , ss. 75(1) , 103(2) , Sch. 9 para. 7
Interpretation
1
In this Schedule—

274
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 10A – Delegation of Appellate Functions
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
“ appointed person ” means a person appointed under section 28F(8) or
28L(10); and
“ appointment ”, in the case of any appointed person, means appointment
under either of those provisions.
Appointments
2
An appointment under section 28F(8) or 28L(10) must be in writing and—
(a)
may relate to any particular appeal or matter specified in the appointment
or to appeals or matters of a description so specified;
(b)
may provide for any function to which it relates to be exercisable by the
appointed person either unconditionally or subject to the fulfilment of such
conditions as may be specified in the appointment; and
(c)
may, by notice in writing given to the appointed person, be revoked at any
time by the Secretary of State in respect of any appeal or matter which has
not been determined by the appointed person before that time.
Powers of appointed person
3
Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, an appointed person shall, in relation to
any appeal or matter to which his appointment relates, have the same powers and
duties as the Secretary of State, other than—
(a)
any function of making regulations;
(b)
any function of holding an inquiry or other hearing or of causing an inquiry
or other hearing to be held; or
(c)
any function of appointing a person for the purpose—
(i) of enabling persons to appear before and be heard by the person
so appointed, or
(ii) of referring any question or matter to that person.
Holding of local inquiries and other hearings by appointed persons
4
(1) If either of the parties to an appeal or matter expresses a wish to appear before and
be heard by the appointed person, the appointed person shall give both of them an
opportunity of appearing and being heard.
(2) Whether or not a party to an appeal or matter has asked for an opportunity to appear
and be heard, the appointed person—
(a)
may hold a local inquiry or other hearing in connection with the appeal or
matter, and
(b)
shall, if the Secretary of State so directs, hold a local inquiry in connection
with the appeal or matter.
(3) Where an appointed person holds a local inquiry or other hearing by virtue of this
Schedule, an assessor may be appointed by the Secretary of State to sit with the
appointed person at the inquiry or hearing and advise him on any matters arising,
notwithstanding that the appointed person is to determine the appeal or matter.
(4) Subject to section 28F(10) or 28L(12), the costs of a local inquiry held under this
Schedule shall be defrayed by the Secretary of State.

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 11 – Procedure in Connection with Certain Orders under Part II
Document Generated: 2020-12-04