271
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
Epioblasma torulosa torulosa (otherwise known as Dysnomia torulosa torulosa)
Epioblasma turgidula (otherwise known as Dysnomia turgidula)
Epioblasma walkeri (otherwise known as Dysnomia walkeri)
Fusconaia cuneolus
Fusconaia edgariana
Lampsilis higginsi
Lampsilis orbiculata orbiculata
Lampsilis satura
Lampsilis verescens
Plethobasus cicatricosus
Plethobasus cooperianus
Pleurobema plenum
Potamilus capax (otherwise known as Proptera capax)
Quadrula intermedia
Quadrula sparsa
Toxolasma cylindrella (otherwise known as Carunculina cylindrella)
Unio nickliniana (otherwise known as Megalonaias nickliniana)
Unio tampicoensis tecomatensis (otherwise known as Lampsilis tampicoensis
tecomatensis)
Villosa trabalis (otherwise known as Micromya trabalis)
NOTE. The second column of this Schedule gives a common name or names, where
available, and is included by way of guidance only ; in the event of any dispute or
proceedings, only the first column is to be taken into account.
PART III
SCHEDULE INSERTED AS SCHEDULE 5
SCHEDULE 5
PLANTS THE SALE ETC. OF WHICH IS RESTRICTED
This Schedule applies to the kinds of plant specified in the second column below—

272
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 10 – Amendment of the Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act 1976
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
Family
Kind
Apocynaceae
Pachypodium namaquanum
Araceae
Alocasia sanderana
Cactaceae
Ariocarpus agavoides
 
Ariocarpus scapharostrus
 
Aztekium ritteri
 
Echinocereus lindsayi
 
Obregonia denegrii
 
Pelecyphora aselliformis
 
Pelecyphora strobiliformis
Caryocaraceae
Caryocar costaricense
Caryophyllaceae
Gymnocarpus przewalskii
 
Melandrium mongolicus
 
Silene mongolica
 
Stellaria pulvinata
Cupressaceae
Fitzroya cupressoides
 
Pilgerodendron uviferum
Cycadaceae
Mirocycas calocoma
Gentianaceae
Prepusa hookeriana
Humiriaceae
Vantanea barbourii
Juglandaceae
Engelhardtia pterocarpa
Leguminosae
Ammopiptanthus mongolicum
 
Cynometra hemitomophylla
 
Platymiscium pleiostachyum
 
Tachigalia versicolor
Liliaceae
Aloe albida
 
Aloe pillansii
 
Aloe polyphylla
 
Aloe thorncropftii
 
Aloe vossii
Melastomataceae
Lavoisiera itambana
Meliaceae
Guarea longipetiola
Moraceae
Batocarpus costaricensis
Nepenthaceae
Nepenthes rajah
Orchidaceae
Cattleya skinneri

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 10A – Delegation of Appellate Functions
Document Generated: 2020-12-04