177
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Part whether or not, as respects the
map and statement, the requirements of section 54 have been complied with.]
(4) The statement prepared under subsection (3) shall specify, as the relevant date for the
purposes of the map, such date, not being earlier than six months before the preparation
of the map and statement, as the authority may determine.
(5) As regards every definitive map and statement, the surveying authority shall keep—
(a)
a copy of the map and statement; and
(b)
copies of all orders under this Part modifying the map and statement,
available for inspection free of charge at all reasonable hours at one or more places in
each district comprised in the area to which the map and statement relate and, so far
as appears practicable to the surveying authority, a place in each parish so comprised;
and the authority shall be deemed to comply with the requirement to keep such copies
available for inspection in a district or parish if they keep available for inspection there
a copy of so much of the map and statement and copies of so many of the orders as
relate to the district or parish.
[F477(5A) Subsection (5) shall apply in relation to land in Wales as if “in each district comprised”
were omitted.]
(6) Notwithstanding anything in subsection (5), an authority shall not be required to keep
available for inspection more than one copy of—
(a)
any definitive map and statement; or
(b)
each order under this Part modifying the map and statement,
if, as respects the area to which that map and statement relate, a subsequent map and
statement have been prepared under subsection (3); and the said single copies may be
kept in such place in the area of the authority as they may determine.
[F478(6A) In subsection (1), the reference to an order under the foregoing provisions of this Part
includes a reference to so much of an order to which section 53A applies as contains
provision made by virtue of subsection (2) of that section; and subsections (5) and
(6) apply to—
(a)
orders to which section 53A applies modifying the map and statement, and
(b)
such documents relating to them as may be prescribed by regulations made
by the Secretary of State,
as those subsections apply to orders under this Part modifying the map and statement.
(6B) Regulations under paragraph (b) of subsection (6A) may require any document to be
prepared by a surveying authority for the purposes of that paragraph, and any such
document shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the regulations.
(6C) Regulations made by the Secretary of State may require any surveying authority—
(a)
to keep such other documents as may be prescribed by the regulations
available for inspection at such times and places and in such manner as may
be so prescribed, or
(b)
to provide to any other surveying authority any document so prescribed which
that authority is, by regulations under paragraph (a), required to keep available
for inspection.]
(7) Every surveying authority shall take such steps as they consider expedient for bringing
to the attention of the public the provisions of this Part including, in particular,
section 53(5) and subsection (5).

178
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
Part III – Public Rights of Way
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(8) Regulations under this section shall be made by statutory instrument which shall be
subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
Textual Amendments
F473 Words in s. 57(1) repealed (2.5.2006 for E. and otherwise prosp.) by 2000 c. 37, ss. 51, 102, 103(3),
Sch. 5 Pt. I para. 7(2), Sch. 16 Pt. II; S.I. 2006/1172, art. 2
F474 Words in s. 57(2) substituted (2.5.2006 for E. and otherwise prosp.) by 2000 c. 37, ss. 51, 103(3), Sch.