55
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
[
F92(ia)
best practice for—
(i) keeping invasive alien species in contained holding,
(ii) measures to ensure such species cannot reproduce or escape,
(ib) the circumstances in which an animal which belongs to an invasive
alien species is considered to be a companion animal,]
(ii) section 14, 14ZC, 14A or 14B;
(iii) any order made under any of those sections;
(iv) species control agreements;
(v) species control orders;
(vi) the code;
[
F93(ba)
which species, sub-species or lower taxons of animal, plant, fungus or micro-
organism are considered to be invasive alien species,]
(c)
the native range of any type of animal or plant;
(d)
the circumstances in which any type of animal is considered to be—
(i) in captivity; or
(ii) under the control or otherwise of a person at a place outwith its native
range;
(e)
the circumstances in which a type of plant is considered to be growing in the
wild outwith its native range, and conduct that would cause any type of plant
to grow in the wild;
(f)
the circumstances in which a type of invasive animal or plant is considered to
be kept in a person's possession or under a person's control;
(g)
which types of animals or plants are invasive and the circumstances (if any)
in which any such type of animal or plant is not considered to be invasive;
(h)
best practice (where permitted) for—
(i) keeping animals of any type which are invasive or which are kept at
a place from which they may not be put outwith the control of any
person;
(ii) keeping plants of any type which are invasive or which are kept at a
place outwith their native range;
(iii) releasing animals of any type from captivity; and
(iv) planting, or otherwise causing to grow, any type of plant in the wild;
(i)
best practice for—
(i) containing, capturing or killing animals of any type which are outwith
the control of any person and which are—
(A) at a place outwith their native range; or
(B) animals of a type specified in an order made under
section 14(1)(a)(ii);
(ii) containing, uprooting or destroying plants of any type which are
growing in the wild outwith their native range; and
(iii) transferring animals or plants of any type which are not permitted to
be kept by virtue of section 14ZC into the custody of Scottish Natural
Heritage or any other person (and for keeping such animals or plants
prior to the transfer);
(j)
the making and content of species control agreements;
(k)
the making, content of and enforcement of species control orders.
(3) The Scottish Ministers may revoke, replace or revise a code of practice.

56
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
Part I – Wildlife
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(4) The first code of practice, and any replacement code of practice, made under this
section—
(a)
requires to be laid before, and approved by resolution of, the Scottish
Parliament; and
(b)
comes into effect on such date after approval under paragraph (a) as is
specified in the code.
(5) Any revision to a code of practice (or revocation of a code of practice which is not
being replaced) must—
(a)
be laid before the Scottish Parliament; and
(b)
specify the date on which it is to come into effect (such date to be at least 40
days after it is so laid, disregarding any period during which the Parliament
is dissolved or in recess).
(6) The Scottish Parliament may, before any such revision or revocation comes into effect,
resolve that it is not to come into effect.
(7) The Scottish Ministers must publish a code of practice (or any replacement or revision)
made under this section no later than the day before the code (or replacement or
revision) is to come into effect.
(8) Before making, revoking, replacing or revising a code of practice, the Scottish
Ministers must consult—
(a)
Scottish Natural Heritage; and
(b)
any other person appearing to them to have an interest in the code.
(9) A person's failure to comply with a provision of a code of practice—
(a)
does not of itself render the person liable to proceedings of any sort; but
(b)
may be taken into account in determining any question in any such
proceedings.
(10) In any proceedings for an offence under section 14, 14ZC, 14A, [F9414AA,] 14B or
14K—
(a)
failure to comply with a relevant provision of a code of practice may be relied
upon as tending to establish liability;
(b)
compliance with a relevant provision of a code of practice may be relied upon
as tending to negative liability.
[
F95(11)
In subsection (2)—
“contained holding” means closed facilities from which escape or spread
is not possible,
“invasive alien species” has the same meaning as in section 14AA.]]
Textual Amendments
F89
S. 14C inserted (S.) (1.1.2012) by Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 2011 (asp 6), ss.
15, 43(1) (with s. 41(1)); S.S.I. 2011/433, art. 2(1)(d)
F90
Word in s. 14C(1)(a) inserted (1.11.2019) by The Conservation (Natural Habitats, c.) (Miscellaneous
Amendments) (Scotland) Regulations 2019 (S.S.I. 2019/364), regs. 1(2), 2(3)(a)
F91
Words in s. 14C(2)(a) repealed (S.) (1.4.2019) by Forestry and Land Management (Scotland) Act 2018
(asp 8), s. 85(2), sch. 2 (with s. 83); S.S.I. 2019/47, reg. 2 (with regs. 3-22)

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
Part I – Wildlife
Document Generated: 2020-12-04