17
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(e)
uses any mechanically propelled vehicle in immediate pursuit of a wild bird
for the purpose of killing or taking that bird, [F26 ; or
(f)
knowingly causes or permits to be done an act which is mentioned in
the foregoing provisions of this subsection and which is not lawful under
subsection (5),]
he shall be guilty of an offenceF27. . . .
(2) Subject to subsection (3), the Secretary of State may by order, either generally or in
relation to any kind of wild bird specified in the order, amend subsection (1) by adding
any method of killing or taking wild birds or by omitting any such method which is
mentioned in that subsection.
(3) The power conferred by subsection (2) shall not be exerciseable, except for the purpose
of complying with an international obligation, in relation to any method of killing or
taking wild birds which involves the use of a firearm.
(4) In any proceedings under subsection (1)(a) it shall be a defence to show that the article
was set in position for the purpose of killing or taking, in the interests of public health,
agriculture, forestry, fisheries or nature conservation, any wild animals which could
be lawfully killed or taken by those means and that he took all reasonable precautions
to prevent injury thereby to wild birds.
F28[(4A) In any proceedings under subsection (1)(f) relating to an act which is mentioned in
subsection (1)(a) it shall be a defence to show that the article was set in position for
the purpose of killing or taking, in the interests of public health, agriculture, forestry,
fisheries or nature conservation, any wild animals which could be lawfully killed or
taken by those means and that he took or caused to be taken all reasonable precautions
to prevent injury thereby to wild birds.]
(5) Nothing in subsection (1) shall make unlawful—
(a)
F702. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(b)
F702. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(c)
the use of a cage-trap or net for the purpose of taking any [F703grouse, mallard,
partridge or pheasant included in Part I of Schedule 2] if it is shown that the
taking of the bird is solely for the purpose of breeding;
but nothing in this subsection shall make lawful the use of any net for taking birds
in flight or the use for taking birds on the ground of any net which is projected or
propelled otherwise than by hand.
Extent Information
E35
This version of this provision extends to Scotland only; a separate version has been created for
England and Wales only
Textual Amendments
F25
Word "or" in s. 5(1)(d) omitted (25.9.1991) by virtue of Wildlife and Countryside (Amendment) Act