173
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(6) Where by virtue of regulations under subsection (3) there are different cut-off dates
for areas into which different parts of any way extend, the cut-off date in relation to
that way is the later or latest of those dates.
(7) Where it appears to the Secretary of State that any provision of this Part can by virtue
of subsection (1) have no further application he may by order make such amendments
or repeals in this Part as appear to him to be, in consequence, necessary or expedient.
(8) An order or regulations under this section shall be made by statutory instrument
which shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of
Parliament.]
Textual Amendments
F460 S. 54A inserted (prosp.) by 2000 c. 37, ss. 51, 103(3), Sch. 5 Pt. I para. 4
55
No further surveys or reviews under the 1949 Act.
(1) No survey under sections 27 to 32 of the 1949 Act, or review under section 33 of that
Act, shall be begun after the commencement date; and where on that date a surveying
authority have not completed such a survey or review begun earlier, the Secretary of
State may, after consultation with the authority, direct the authority—
(a)
to complete the survey or review; or
(b)
to abandon the survey or review to such extent as may be specified in the
direction.
(2) Where such a survey or review so begun is abandoned, the Secretary of State shall
give such notice of the abandonment as appears to him requisite.
(3) Where, in relation to any area, no such survey has been so begun or such a survey
so begun is abandoned, the surveying authority shall prepare for that area a map and
statement such that, when they have been modified in accordance with the provisions
of this Part, they will serve as the definitive map and statement for that area.
(4) Where such a survey so begun is abandoned after a draft map and statement have
been prepared and the period for making representations or objections has expired, the
authority shall by order modify the map and statement prepared under subsection (3)
so as—
(a)
to give effect to any determination or decision of the authority under
section 29(3) or (4) of the 1949 Act in respect of which either there is no right
of appeal or no notice of appeal has been duly served;
(b)
to give effect to any decision of the Secretary of State under section 29(6) of
that Act; and
(c)
to show any particulars shown in the draft map and statement with respect
to which no representation or objection has been duly made, or in relation to
which all such representations or objections had been withdrawn.
(5) Where such a review so begun is abandoned after a draft map and statement have
been prepared and the period for making representations or objections has expired, the
authority shall by order modify the map and statement under review so as—
(a)
to give effect to any decision of the Secretary of State under paragraph 4(4)
of Part II of Schedule 3 to the 1968 Act; and

174
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
Part III – Public Rights of Way
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(b)
to show any particulars shown in the draft map and statement but not in
the map and statement under review, and to omit any particulars shown in
the map and statement under review but not in the draft map and statement,
being (in either case) particulars with respect to which no representation or
objection has been duly made, or in relation to which all such representations
or objections have been withdrawn.
(6) Orders under subsection (4) or (5) shall take effect on their being made.
[F461(7) Every way which—
(a)
in pursuance of an order under subsection (5) is shown in a definitive map and
statement as a byway open to all traffic, a bridleway or a footpath, and
(b)
before the making of the order, was shown in the map and statement under
review as a road used as a public path,
shall be a highway maintainable at the public expense.
(8) Subsection (7) does not oblige a highway authority to provide, on a way shown in a
definitive map and statement as a byway open to all traffic, a metalled carriage-way
or a carriage-way which is by any other means provided with a surface suitable for
the passage of vehicles.]
Textual Amendments
F461 S. 55(7)(8) inserted (27.9.2005 for E. and 11.5.2006 for W.) by 2000 c. 37, ss. 51, 103(3), Sch. 5 Pt. I
para. 5; S.I. 2005/2459, art. 2(1); S.I. 2006/1279, art. 2
56
Effect of definitive map and statement.
(1) A definitive map and statement shall be conclusive evidence as to the particulars
contained therein to the following extent, namely—
(a)
where the map shows a footpath, the map shall be conclusive evidence that
there was at the relevant date a highway as shown on the map, and that the
public had thereover a right of way on foot, so however that this paragraph
shall be without prejudice to any question whether the public had at that date
any right of way other than that right;
(b)
where the map shows a bridleway, the map shall be conclusive evidence that
there was at the relevant date a highway as shown on the map, and that the
public had thereover at that date a right of way on foot and a right of way on
horseback or leading a horse, so however that this paragraph shall be without
prejudice to any question whether the public had at that date any right of way
other than those rights;
(c)
where the map shows a byway open to all traffic, the map shall be conclusive
evidence that there was at the relevant date a highway as shown on the map,
and that the public had thereover at that date a right of way for vehicular and
all other kinds of traffic;
(d)
where the map shows a [F462restricted byway], the map shall [F463, subject to
subsection (2A),] be conclusive evidence that there was at the relevant date a
highway as shown on the map, and that the public had thereover at that date
a right of way on foot and a right of way on horseback or leading a horse
[F464together with a right of way for vehicles other than mechanically propelled
vehicles], so however that this paragraph shall be without prejudice to any

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
Part III – Public Rights of Way
Document Generated: 2020-12-04