289
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
of State to give him notice of all such draft public path creation
orders, draft public path extinguishment orders and draft public path
diversion orders as are prepared bv the Secretary of State during
a specified period, are of a specified description and relate to land
comprised in a specified area ; and in this sub-paragraph “ specified
” means specified in the requirement.
(3C)
The Secretary of State may, in any particular case, direct that it shall
not be necessary to comply with sub- paragraph (3)(b)(i) above ; but
if he so directs in the case of any land, then in addition to publication
the notice shall be addressed to “The owners and any occupiers” of
the land (describing it) and a copy or copies of the notice shall be
affixed to some conspicuous object or objects on the land.”
(4) After sub-paragraph (4) of that paragraph there shall be inserted the following
sub-paragraphs—
“(4A)
Sub-paragraph (3)(b) and (c) and, where applicable, sub-paragraphs
(3C) and (4) above shall be complied with not less than 28 days
before the expiration of the time specified in the notice.
(4B)
A notice required to be served by sub-paragraph (3)(b)(i), (ii) or (iv)
above shall be accompanied by a copy of the order.
(4C)
A notice required to be displayed by sub-paragraph (3)(c)(i) above
at the ends of so much of any way as is affected by the order shall
be accompanied by a plan showing the general effect of the order so
far as it relates to that way.
(4D)
In sub-paragraph (3)(c)(ii) above “council offices” means offices or
buildings acquired or provided by a council or by the council of a
parish or community or the parish meeting of a parish not having a
separate parish council.”
7
After paragraph 2 of that Schedule there shall be inserted the following paragraph—
“(2A) (1)
A decision of the Secretary of State under paragraph 2 above as respects an
order made by an authority other than the Secretary of State shall, except
in such classes of case as may for the tim,- being be prescribed or as may
be specified in directions given by the Secretary of State, be made by a
person appointed by the Secretary of State for the purpose instead of by
the Secretary of State ; and a decision made by a person so appointed shall
be treated as a decision of the Secretary of State.
(2)
The Secretary of State may, if he thinks fit, direct that a decision
which, by virtue of sub-paragraph (1) above and apart from this
sub-paragraph, fahs to be made by a person appointed by the
Secretary of State shall instead be made by the Secretary of State;
and a direction under this sub-paragraph shall state the reasons
for which it is given and shall be served on the person, if any, so
appointed, the authority and any person by whom a representation
or objection has been duly made and not withdrawn.
(3)
Where the Secretary of State has appointed a person to make a
decision under paragraph 2 above the Secretary of State may,
at any time before the making of the decision, appoint another
person to make it instead of the person first appointed to make it.

290
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 16 – Orders Creating, Extinguishing or Diverting Footpaths or Bridleways
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(4)
Where by virtue of sub-paragraph (2) or (3) above a particular
decision falls to be made by the Secretary of State or any other
person instead of the person first appointed to make it, anything
done by or in relation to the latter shall be treated as having been
done by or in relation to the former.
(5)
Provision may be made by regulations of the Secretary of State
for the giving of publicity to any directions given by the Secretary
of State under this paragraph.”
8
(1) In paragraph 4 of that Schedule after the words “free of charge” there shall be inserted
the words “and copies thereof may be obtained at a reasonable charge” and for heads
(a) and (b) there shall be substituted the following heads—
“(a)
serve a like notice on any persons on whom notices were required
to be served under paragraph 1(3)(b), (3C) or (4) above ; and
(b)
cause like notices to be displayed in the like manner as the notices
caused to be displayed under paragraph 1(3)(c) above;”.
(2) That paragraph as so amended shall be renumbered as paragraph 4(1) of that
Schedule and after that provision as so renumbered there shall be inserted the
following sub-paragraphs—
“(2)
A notice required to be served by sub-paragraph (1)(a) above, on—
(a) a person on whom notice was required to be served by
paragraph 1(3)(b)(i) or (ii) above , or
(b) in the case of an order which has been confirmed or made
with modifications, a person on whom notice was required
to be served by paragraph 1(3)(b)(iv) above,
shall be accompanied by a copy of the order as confirmed or made.
(3)
As soon as may be after a decision not to confirm an order to
which this Schedule applies, the authority by whom the order was
made shall give notice of the decision by serving a copy of it on
any persons on whom notices were required to be served under
paragraph 1(3)(b), (3C) or (4) above.”.
9
After that paragraph there shall be inserted the following paragraph—
“(4A) As soon as may be after an order to which this Schedule applies has come
into operation otherwise than—
(a)
on the date on which it was confirmed or made by the Secretary of
State or confinned as an unopposed order ; or
(b)
at the expiration of a specified period beginning with that date,
the authority by whom the order was made or, in the case of an order made by
the Secretary of State, the Secretary of State shall give notice of its coming
into operation by publication in at least one local newspaper circulating in
the area in which the land to which the order relates is situated.”
Supplemental
10
(1) The amendments made by the foregoing provisions of this Schedule shall not apply in
relation to any order if it was made or a draft thereof was prepared, or a notice relating
to it was given under paragraph 1 of the relevant Schedule, before the commencement
date.

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 17 – Enactments repealed
Document Generated: 2020-12-04