243
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
Enforcement
18
(1) This paragraph applies where an environmental authority considers that an owner of
premises required by a species control order to carry out a species control operation
has not done so by the date or in the way specified in the order.
(2) The authority must give the owner notice to that effect.
(3) Sub-paragraphs (4) to (6) apply if, after a week after giving notice under sub-
paragraph (2), the authority considers that the owner has still not carried out the
species control operation in the way specified in the order.
(4) The authority may carry out the operation itself or carry out such further work as is
necessary to ensure that the operation is carried out in the way specified in the order.
(5) The authority may recover from the owner any expenses reasonably incurred by it in
doing so (less any payment which the authority would apart from this paragraph have
been required to make to the owner in respect of the carrying out of the operations
by the owner).
(6) The authority is not required to make any payment provided for under paragraph
13(2)(b) in relation to the operation (and may recover any payment made under that
paragraph).
Offences
19
(1) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with a requirement
imposed on that person by a species control order commits an offence.
(2) A person who intentionally obstructs a person from carrying out an operation
required or proposed under a species control order commits an offence.
(3) A person guilty of an offence under sub-paragraph (1) or (2) is liable on summary
conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks, or a fine, or both.
(4) In relation to an offence committed before section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act
2003 comes into force, the reference in sub-paragraph (3) to 51 weeks is to be read
as a reference to 6 months.
(5) In relation to an offence committed before section 85 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing
and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 comes into force, the reference in sub-
paragraph (3) to a fine is to be read as a reference to a fine not exceeding £40,000.
Liability
20
(1) An owner of premises is not liable to any other person for doing anything required
to be done by a species control order.
(2) An environmental authority is not liable to a person with an interest in premises for
anything done—
(a)
by an owner pursuant to a requirement included in a species control order, or
(b)
by the authority pursuant to—
(i) provision included in a species control order under paragraph 11(1)
(b), (2)(b) or (3), or
(ii) paragraph 18(4).

244
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 9A – Species control agreements and orders (England and Wales)
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
PART 4
POWERS OF ENTRY
Powers of entry
21
(1) A person who is authorised to do so may enter any premises to—
(a)
assist an environmental authority to determine whether to offer to enter into
a species agreement with a person,
(b)
assist an environmental authority to determine whether to make or revoke
a species control order,
(c)
investigate suspected non-compliance with a species control agreement or a
species control order,
(d)
carry out species control operations for an environmental authority under a
species control order,
(e)
place a notice as specified in paragraph 10(2)(d)(i) or 14(2) (no identifiable
owner), or
(f)
carry out species control operations or work pursuant to paragraph 18(4).
This is subject to the other provisions of this Schedule.
(2) A person may not enter premises under sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (b) with a view
to establishing whether a species is present unless the environmental authority has
reasonable grounds for suspecting that it is.
Authorisation by justice of the peace
22
(1) To enter premises under paragraph 21 a person must be authorised by a warrant issued
by a justice of the peace where—
(a)
the premises consist of a dwelling or a garden, yard, outbuildings or other
land used or enjoyed wholly with a dwelling,
(b)
admission to the premises has been refused by an owner or refusal is
reasonably apprehended,
(c)
the premises are unoccupied,
(d)
the owner is temporarily absent,
(e)
giving notice would defeat the purpose of entry,
(f)
entry is to carry out species control operations for an environmental authority
under an order under paragraph 10(2)(c) (emergency),
(g)
entry is to carry out species control operations for an environmental authority
under an order under paragraph 10(2)(d) (no identifiable owner),
(h)
entry is to place a notice as specified in paragraph 10(2)(d)(i) or 14(2), or
(i)
entry is to carry out operations or work pursuant to paragraph 18(4) which
the environmental authority considers to be urgently necessary.
(2) A justice of the peace may not grant a warrant—
(a)
in the circumstances in sub-paragraph (1)(a) to (d) unless satisfied that
reasonable notice of the proposed entry has been given to all owners of the
premises of whom the environmental authority is aware, or
(b)
in the circumstances in paragraph (1)(g) unless satisfied that the requirement
in paragraph 14(2) (notice) has been met.

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 9A – Species control agreements and orders (England and Wales)
Document Generated: 2020-12-04