68
Application to the Isles of Scilly.
The Secretary of State may, after consultation with the Council of the Isles of Scilly,
by order made by statutory instrument provide for the application of the provisions of
Part II or III to the Isles of Scilly as if those Isles were a separate county; any any such
order may provide for the application of those provisions to those Isles subject to such
modifications as may be specified in the order.
69
Offences by bodies corporate etc.
(1) Where a body corporate is guilty of an offence under this Act and that offence is proved
to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to
any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of
the body corporate or any person who was purporting to act in any such capacity he,
as well as the body corporate, shall be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(2) Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its members subsection (1) shall
apply in relation to the acts and defaults of a member in connection with his functions
of management as if he were a director of the body corporate.
[F49669A Offences by Scottish partnerships etc.
Where a Scottish partnership or other unincorporated association is guilty of an
offence under Part 1 of this Act and that offence is proved to have been committed
with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of—
(a)
in relation to a Scottish partnership, any partner or any person who was
purporting to act in such capacity;
(b)
in relation to an unincorporated association other than a Scottish partnership,
any person who is concerned in the management or control of the association
or any person who was purporting to act in any such capacity,
he (as well as the partnership or, as the case may be, other unincorporated association)
is guilty of the offence and is liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.]
Textual Amendments
F496 S. 69A inserted (S.) (1.1.2012) by Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 2011 (asp 6), ss.
23, 43(1) (with s. 41(1)); S.S.I. 2011/433, art. 2(1)(e)
70
Financial provisions.
(1) There shall be defrayed out of money provided by Parliament—
(a)
any administrative expenses incurred by any Minister of the Crown under this
Act; and
(b)
any increase attributable to the provisions of this Act in the sums payable out
of money so provided under any other enactment.

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
Part IV – Miscellaneous and General
Document Generated: 2020-12-04