37
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(ii) in Scotland, likely to cause bodily injury to any such wild animal;
(c)
sets in position any electrical device for killing or stunning, or any poisonous,
poisoned or stupefying substance, of such a nature and so placed as to be—
(i) in England and Wales, calculated to cause bodily injury to any wild
animal included in Schedule 6;
(ii) in Scotland, likely to cause bodily injury to any such wild animal;
(d)
uses for the purpose of killing or taking any wild animal included in
Schedule 6—
(i) any electrical device for killing or stunning;
(ii) any poisonous, poisoned or stupefying substance;
(iii) any net;
(iv) any automatic or semi-automatic weapon;
(v) any device for illuminating a target or sighting device for night
shooting;
(vi) any form of artificial light or any mirror or other dazzling device;
(vii) any gas or smoke not falling within sub-paragraph (ii);
(viii) any sound recording used as a decoy; or
(ix) any mechanically propelled vehicle in immediate pursuit of any such
animal;
(e)
uses any mechanically propelled vehicle for the purpose of driving any wild
animal included in Schedule 6; or
(f)
knowingly causes or permits to be done an act mentioned in paragraphs (a)
to (e).]
F745[F746(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F745(3A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F745(3B) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3C) Subject to the provisions of this Part, any person who—
(a)
is, without reasonable excuse, in possession of; or
(b)
sells, or offers or exposes for sale,
a snare which is capable of operating as a self-locking snare or a snare of any other
type specified in an order under subsection (1)(a) shall be guilty of an offence.
F747(3D) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3E) Subject to the provisions of this Part, any person who uses a snare otherwise than
in accordance with such requirements as may be specified in an order made by the
Scottish Ministers, or who knowingly causes or permits any other person to do so,
shall be guilty of an offence.]
(4) The Secretary of State may, for the purpose of complying with an international
obligation, by order, either generally or in relation to any kind of wild animal specified
in the order, amend subsection (1) or (2) by adding any method of killing or taking
wild animals or by omitting any such method as is mentioned in that subsection.
[F748(4A) The Scottish Ministers may by order specify—
(a)
criteria which articles of a type referred to in subsections (1) to (3E) must meet
to be treated as articles of that type for the purposes of those subsections,

38
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
Part I – Wildlife
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(b)
circumstances in which articles of that type are to be treated as having been
set or used in a manner which constitutes an offence under those subsections.]
(5) In any proceedings for an offence under subsection [F749(1)(c)] or [F53(2)(a), (d) or (e)],
[F54and in any proceedings for an offence under subsection (1)(d) or (2)(f) relating to
an act which is mentioned in any of those paragraphs] the animal in question shall be
presumed to have been a wild animal unless the contrary is shown.
(6) In any proceedings for an offence under [F55subsection (2)(b) or (c)] it shall be a
defence to show that the article was set in position by the accused for the purpose
of killing or taking, in the interests of public health, agriculture, forestry, fisheries or
nature conservation, any wild animals which could be lawfully killed or taken by those
means and that he took all reasonable precautions to prevent injury thereby to any wild
animals included in [F56the relevant Schedule].
F57[(7) In any proceedings for an offence under subsection (2)(f) relating to an act which is
mentioned in [F58subsection (2)(b) or (c)] it shall be a defence to show that the article
was set in position for the purpose of killing or taking, in the interests of public health,
agriculture, forestry, fisheries or nature conservation, any wild animals which could
be lawfully killed or taken by those means and that he took or caused to be taken
all reasonable precautions to prevent injury thereby to any wild animals included in
[F59the relevant Schedule].]
[F60(7A) In subsections (6) and (7), “the relevant Schedule” means—
(a)
where proceedings relate to an offence under subsection (2)(b), Schedule 6
or 6ZA;
(b)
where proceedings relate to an offence under subsection (2)(c), Schedule 6.]
Extent Information
E40
This version of this provision extends to Scotland only; a separate version has been created for
England and Wales only
Textual Amendments
F49
Word "or" in s. 11(1)(b) omitted (25.9.1991) by virtue of Wildlife and Countryside (Amendment) Act