41
Duties of agriculture Ministers with respect to the countryside.
F361[F362(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2) In the exercise of his general duty under section 4(2) of the M28Small Landholders
(Scotland) Act 1911 of promoting the interests of agriculture and other rural industries,
and without prejudice to the generality of that duty, the Secretary of State shall make
provision, through such organisation as he considers appropriate, for the giving of
[F363(a)
advice to persons carrying on agricultural businesses on the conservation and
enhancement of the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside;
(b)
advice to such persons on diversification into other enterprises of benefit to
the rural economy; and
(c)
advice to government departments and other bodies exercising statutory
functions on the promotion and furtherance of such diversification as is
mentioned in paragraph (b).]
(3) Where an application for [F364a farm capital grant] is made as respects expenditure
incurred or to be incurred for the purposes of activities on land which is in a National
Park [F365(including a National Park in Scotland)]or an area specified for the purposes
of this subsection by the Ministers, the appropriate Minister—
(a)
shall, so far as may be consistent with the purposes of the [F366the grant
provisions], so exercise his functions thereunder as to further the conservation
and enhancement of the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside and to
promote its enjoyment by the public; and
(b)
where the relevant authority have objected to the making of the grant on the
ground that the activities in question have had or will have an adverse effect
on the natural beauty or amenity of the countryside or its enjoyment by the
public, shall not make the grant except after considering the objection and, in
the case of land in England, after consulting with the Secretary of State;
F367. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(4) Where, in consequence of an objection by the relevant authority, an application for
a grant as respects expenditure to be incurred is refused on the ground that the
activities in question will have such an effect as is mentioned in subsection (3)(b), the

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
Part II – Nature Conservation, Countryside and National Parks
Document Generated: 2020-12-04