251
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(e)
paragraph (g) (permitting to reproduce, growing or cultivating, including in
contained holding).
(2) The appropriate authority must not grant a licence under section 16(4)(c) permitting
an activity which contravenes one of the following paragraphs of that Article unless
paragraph 8 or 9 applies—
(a)
paragraph (e) (placing on the market),
(b)
paragraph (h) (releasing into the environment).
Research etc.
6.
This paragraph applies if the licence—
(a)
is granted to an establishment,
(b)
permits an activity to be done in the course of—
(i) research on an invasive alien species,
(ii) ex-situ conservation of an invasive alien species,
(iii) scientific production, and subsequent medicinal use of, a product
derived from an invasive alien species where its use is necessary
for the advancement of human health, or
(iv) in exceptional circumstances, such other activities as are justified
for reasons of compelling public interest, including those of a
social or economic nature, in accordance with Article 9 of the
Invasive Alien Species Regulation, and
(c)
is subject to the conditions specified in Article 8(2) and (3) of that
Regulation.
Keeping animals until the end of their natural lives
7.
This paragraph applies if—
(a)
the licence is granted for the purpose of the keeping of an animal by a
facility (including any necessary ancillary activities such as transportation)
until the end of its natural life in accordance with Article 31(4) of the
Invasive Alien Species Regulation, and
(b)
the appropriate authority is satisfied that all appropriate controls are in place
to ensure that reproduction or escape of the animal is not possible.
Eradication measures
8.
This paragraph applies if the licence is—
(a)
granted for the purpose of implementation of an eradication measure
pursuant to Article 17 of the Invasive Alien Species Regulation, and
(b)
subject to such conditions as are, in the opinion of the appropriate authority,
necessary to meet the aim of ensuring that the eradication measure to
which the licence relates will be effective in achieving the complete
and permanent removal of the population of the invasive alien species
concerned.
Management measures
9.
(1) This paragraph applies if the licence is granted for the purpose of implementation
of a management measure pursuant to Article 19 of the Invasive Alien Species
Regulation.

252
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 10 – Amendment of the Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act 1976
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(2) But, where the licence is granted for the purpose of the commercial use, on a
temporary basis, of an invasive alien species as part of such a management measure
pursuant to Article 19(2) of that Regulation, this paragraph applies only if the
appropriate authority is satisfied that—
(a)
there is strict justification for that use, and
(b)
all appropriate controls are in place to avoid any further spread of the species
concerned.]
X15 SCHEDULE 10
Section 15
AMENDMENT OF THE ENDANGERED SPECIES (IMPORT AND EXPORT) ACT 1976
Editorial Information
X15
The text of Sch. 7 paras. 3-12 and Sch. 10 is in the form in which it was originally enacted: it was not
reproduced in Statutes in Force and does not reflect any amendments or repeals which may have been
made prior to 1.2.1991.
PART I
THE AMENDMENTS
Licences
1
(1) After subsection (3) of section 1 of the 1976 Act (restriction on importation and
exportation of certain animals and plants) there shall be inserted the following
subsections—
“(3A) Subsection (3) above shall not apply in relation to an application of any
description if the scientific authority concerned has advised the Secretary of
State as to whether licences should be issued in pursuance of applications of
that description and, if so, their terms.
(3B) Where the Secretary of State is satisfied that the issue of a licence authorising
the importation or exportation of any item which—
(a)
is part of or derives from or is made wholly or partly from an animal
of any of the kinds to which Schedule 1 or a plant of any of the kinds
to which Schedule 2 to this Act for the time being applies ; but
(b)
is not an item to which Schedule 3 to this Act for the time being
applies.
would facilitate the importation or exportation of that item, he may, if he
considers it expedient to do so, issue such a licence.”
(2) In subsections (4), (5), (6) and (7) of that section after the words “subsection (2)”
there shall be inserted the words “or (3B)”.
(3) In subsection (4) of that section after paragraph (a) there shall be inserted the
following paragraphs—

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 10 – Amendment of the Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act 1976
Document Generated: 2020-12-04