247
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
28
(1) A person's failure to comply with a provision of a code under paragraph 26 or 27
does not make the person liable to civil or criminal proceedings.
(2) A code under paragraph 26 or 27—
(a)
is admissible in evidence in any civil proceedings, and
(b)
must be taken into account by a court in any civil proceedings in which it
appears to the court to be relevant.]
[F631SCHEDULE 9B
(introduced bysections 14AA(5) and
16(4B))
INVASIVE ALIEN SPECIES: DEFENCES AND LICENCES
Textual Amendments
F631 Sch. 9B inserted (1.11.2019) (S.) by The Conservation (Natural Habitats, c.) (Miscellaneous
Amendments) (Scotland) Regulations 2019 (S.S.I. 2019/364), regs. 1(2), 2(8)
PART 1
INTERPRETATION
Interpretation
1.
In this schedule—
“Invasive Alien Species Regulation” means Regulation (EU) No
1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the prevention
and management of the introduction and spread of invasive alien species,
“contained holding” means closed facilities from which escape or spread
is not possible,
“ex-situ conservation” means the conservation of components of
biological diversity outside their natural habitat,
“invasive alien species” means a species, sub-species or lower taxon of
animal, plant, fungus or micro-organism included on the Union list,
“research” means descriptive or experimental work, undertaken under
regulated conditions to obtain new scientific findings or to develop new
products, including the initial phases of identification, characterisation and
isolation of genetic features, other than those features which make a species
invasive, of invasive alien species only insofar as essential to enable the
breeding of those features into non-invasive species,
“specimen” means a live specimen and includes any part, gamete, seed,
egg or propagule of a species, as well as any hybrids, varieties or breeds that
might grow, hatch or reproduce, as the case may be,
“Union list” means the list of invasive alien species of Union concern
adopted by the European Commission in accordance with Articles 4(1) and
10(4) of the Invasive Alien Species Regulation, as amended from time to
time.

248
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE9B – Invasive alien species: defences and licences
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
PART 2
DEFENCES
Companion animals
2.
(1) This paragraph applies where—
(a)
a person is charged with an offence under section 14ZC or 14AA,
(b)
the charge relates to an animal, and
(c)
the activity to which the charge relates contravenes one of the following
paragraphs of Article 7(1) of the Invasive Alien Species Regulation—
(i) paragraph (b) (keeping, including in contained holding),
(ii) paragraph (d) (transporting to, from or within the Union, except
for the transportation of species to facilities in the context of
eradication).
(2) It is a defence to the charge to show that—
(a)
immediately before the inclusion on the Union list of the species to which
the animal belongs, the animal was kept as a companion animal,
(b)
at all material times the animal was kept—
(i) as a companion animal, or
(ii) for the purpose of transporting the animal to a place mentioned in
sub-paragraph (3), and
(c)
at all material times—
(i) the animal was kept in contained holding, and
(ii) appropriate measures were in place to ensure that it could not
reproduce or escape.
(3) The places referred to in sub-paragraph (2)(b)(ii) are—
(a)
an establishment to which a relevant licence or permit has been granted,
(b)
a facility to which a relevant licence has been granted,
(c)
a place where the animal was to be humanely killed.
(4) In sub-paragraph (3)—
(a)
“relevant licence or permit” means, in relation to an establishment—
(i) a licence granted under section 16(4)(c) by virtue of paragraph 6,
(ii) a permit granted under article 35 of the Invasive Alien Species
(Enforcement and Permitting) Order 2019 (S.I. 2019/527),
(iii) a permit granted under any provision in legislation which applies in
relation to Northern Ireland and which enables a permit to be issued
in accordance with Article 8 or 9 of the Invasive Alien Species
Regulation,
(b)
“relevant licence” means, in relation to a facility—
(i) a licence granted under section 16(4)(c) by virtue of paragraph 7,
(ii) a licence granted under article 36(1) of the Invasive Alien Species
(Enforcement and Permitting) Order 2019 (S.I. 2019/527), for the
purpose mentioned in article 36(2)(d) of that Order,
(iii) a licence granted under any provision in legislation which applies
in relation to Northern Ireland and enables a licence to be issued
for the keeping of an animal by a facility until the end of its natural

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE9B – Invasive alien species: defences and licences
Document Generated: 2020-12-04