3 , 5 , Sch. 1 Pt. I ,Sch. 3
The Highways Act 1980
5
(1) In subsection (1) of section 119 of the Highways Act 1980 (diversion of footpaths
and bridleways) for the words from the beginning to “or on to land” there shall
be substituted the words “Where it appears to a council as respects a footpath or
bridleway in their area (other than one that is a trunk road or a special road) that, in
the interests of the owner, lessee or occupier of land crossed by the path or way or of

288
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 16 – Orders Creating, Extinguishing or Diverting Footpaths or Bridleways
Document Generated: 2020-12-04
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
the public, it is expedient that the line of the path or way, or part of that line, should
be diverted (whether on to land of the same or”.
(2) In subsection (5) of that section for the words “the council may require the owner,
lessee or occupier on whose representations they are acting” there sball be substituted
the words “on the representations of an owner, lessee or occupier of land crossed by
the path or way, the council may require him”.
6
(1) In sub-paragraphs (1)(b) and 2(b) of paragraph I of Schedule 6 to that Act (procedure
as to certain orders relating to footpaths and bridleways) after the words “free of
charge” there shall be inserted the words “and copies thereof may be obtained at a
reasonable charge”.
(2) For sub-paragraph (3) of that paragraph there shall be substituted the following
sub-paragraph—
“(3) The notices to be given under sub-paragraph (1) or (2) above shall be given—
(a)
by publication in at least one local newspaper circulating in the area
in which the land to which the order relates is situated ;
(b)
by serving a like notice on—
(i) every owner, occupier and lessee (except tenants for a
month or any period less than a month and statutory tenants
within the meaning of the Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976 or
the Rent Act 1977) of any of that land ;
(ii) every council, the council of every parish or community and
the parish meeting of every parish not having a separate
parish council, being a council, parish or community whose
area includes any of that land ;
(iii) every person on whom notice is required to be served in
pursuance of sub-paragraph (3A) or (3B) below ; and
(iv) such other persons as may be prescribed in relation to the
area in which that land is situated or as the authority or,
as the case may be, the Secretary of State may consider
appropriate ; and
(c)
by causing a copy of the notice to be displayed in a prominent
position—
(i) at the ends of so much of any footpath or bridleway as is
created, stopped up or diverted by the order ;
(ii) at council offices in the locality of the land to which the
order relates ; and
(iii) at such other places as the authority or, as the case may be,
the Secretary of State may consider appropriate.”
(3) After that sub-paragraph there shall be inserted the following sub-paragraphs—
“(3A)
Any person may, on payment of such reasonable charge as the
authority may consider appropriate, require an authority to give
him notice of all such public path creation orders, public path
extinguishment orders and public path diversion orders as are
made by the authority during a specified period, are of a specified
description and relate to land comprised in a specified area ; and in
this sub-paragraph “ specified ” means specified in the requirement.
(3B)
Any person may, on payment of such reasonable charge as the
Secretary of State may consider appropriate, require the Secretary

Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)
SCHEDULE 16 – Orders Creating, Extinguishing or Diverting Footpaths or Bridleways
Document Generated: 2020-12-04