279
Status: Point in time view as at 25/05/2020. This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: There are outstanding changes not yet made by the legislation.gov.uk
editorial team to Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any changes that have already been made by the
team appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details)
(2) If, after reasonable inquiry has been made, the authority are satsified that it is not
practicable to ascertain the name or address of an owner or occupier of any land to
which the application relates, the authority may direct that the notice required to be
served on him by sub-paragraph (1) may be served by addressing it to him by the
description “owner” or “occupier” of the land (describing it) and by affixing it to
some conspicuous object or objects on the land.
(3) When the requirements of this paragraph have been complied with, the applicant
shall certify that fact to the authority.
(4) Every notice or certificate under this paragraph shall be in the prescribed form.
Determination by authority
3
(1) As soon as reasonably practicable after receiving a certificate under paragraph 2(3),
the authority shall—
(a)
investigate the matters stated in the application; and
(b)
after consulting with every local authority whose area includes the land to
which the application relates, decide whether to make or not to make the
order to which the application relates.
(2) If the authority have not determined the application within twelve months of
their receiving a certificate under paragraph 2(3), then, on the applicant making
representations to the Secretary of State, the Secretary of State may, after consulting
with the authority, direct the authority to determine the application before the
expiration of such period as may be specified in the direction.
(3) As soon as practicable after determining the application, the authority shall give
notice of their decision by serving a copy of it on the applicant and any person on
whom notice of the application was required to be served under paragraph 2(1).
Appeal against a decision not to make an order
4
(1) Where the authority decide not to make an order, the applicant may, at any time
within 28 days after service on him of notice of the decision, serve notice of appeal
against that decision on the Secretary of State and the authority.
(2) If on considering the appeal the Secretary of State considers that an order should be
made, he shall give to the authority such directions as appear to him necessary for
the purpose [F643(which may include a direction as to the time within which an order
is to be made)].
Textual Amendments
F643 Words in Sch. 14 para. 4(2) inserted (E.W.) (13.2.2004 for E. and 31.5.2005 for W.) by 2000 c. 37 , ss.