28 days). DAS contracts6 must be agreed in advance of the advice being given and are particularly 
relevant for proposed operations that are not necessary for the conservation of the site. 
3.  Adopt an approach to our decision making on consents and assents which seeks to find 
solutions whilst ensuring the protection of the SSSI 
Natural England will, as far as practicable, seek to identify workable solutions that both protect the 
features of special interest of the site and support the legitimate activities of landowners, land managers 
and public bodies.  
When making its decisions, Natural England will assess whether it is possible to carry out the 
operations identified as likely to damage a SSSI in ways that are compatible with furthering the 
conservation and enhancement of the special interest of the site, for example by using certain methods, 
or at specific times of year, or on certain parts of the SSSI.  
Where it is not possible to grant our consent/assent to a proposed operation, Natural England will, 
where practicable, work with land managers and public bodies to explore alternative solutions or 
proposals to achieve similar outcomes, which would enable a consent/assent to be granted in future. 
4. Respond to SSSI notices from owner occupiers of SSSIs in a timely and efficient manner 
A notice must be drafted by a notified owner or occupier (or someone authorized to act on their behalf) 
and should be submitted in writing to Natural England’s Single Point of Contact at 
protectedsites@naturalengland.org.uk. Natural England will acknowledge the receipt of a notice with 
an automated reply email.  
Annex 2 details the information that Natural England generally recommends should be included in a 
notice. Providing sufficient information about where, what, when and how the operations would be 
undertaken if permitted can help to ensure a timely decision. If we consider the correspondence 
describing proposed operations cannot be recognised as a notice, we will respond as promptly as 
possible, providing an explanation, for example where a notice is submitted by a third party.  
On receiving a notice Natural England will first check for any existing consents which already authorise 
the proposed operations. This will prevent the unnecessary duplication or ‘layering’ of permissions and 
allow previously consented operations to proceed quickly subject to the acquisition by the SSSI consent 
holder of any other permissions from other bodies. Natural England will inform the applicant if they 
already have a consent for the operations that they have proposed. 
Under the provisions of the Act, Natural England has up to four months from the date on which the notice 
was sent to Natural England in which to determine a Section 28E notice. Natural England will however 
strive to respond to notices within 28 days. For complex cases, where a site visit and/or specialist 
 
6 You can find further information about Natural England’s DAS at https://www.gov.uk/guidance/sites-of-special-scientific-interest-public-body-
responsibilities#get-free-or-charged-advice-from-natural-england 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024