SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
1 
Natural England Standard     
SSSI Regulation 
1:0 About this standard 
Introduction 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) safeguard England’s most important areas of natural 
heritage. The Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981 and subsequent amending legislation1 (referred to in this 
document as ‘the Act’) places a legal duty on Natural England to act for the benefit of SSSIs and take 
reasonable steps, consistent with the proper exercise of its functions, to further the conservation and 
enhancement of the special scientific interest of SSSIs2. 
In order to provide all SSSIs with protection from potentially harmful activities, the Act 
requires: 
• 
owners and occupiers of SSSI land proposing to carry out or permit operations that 
may damage the special interest of their SSSI to first apply for Natural England’s 
consent.  
• 
public bodies proposing to carry out operations which they consider are likely to 
damage the features of special interest within a SSSI (whether within or outside the 
boundary of an SSSI) to first apply for Natural England’s assent  
• 
public bodies proposing to authorise or permit others to carry out operations that may 
be likely to damage the special interest of a SSSI (whether within or outside the 
boundary of an SSSI) to first seek Natural England’s advice 
What does this standard cover? 
This operational standard, which is informed by Natural England’s SSSI Strategic 
Standard, explains the guiding principles that Natural England applies when exercising the 
legal powers given to it by Section 28 of the Act with regard to: 
 
• 
Consents (section 28E of the Act) — issued in response to a written notice of 
proposal from an owner or occupier of an SSSI. Natural England may grant consent 
for the proposed operations, with or without conditions, or refuse to grant consent for 
the proposed operations if it considers that the proposal is not compatible with 
furthering the conservation and enhancement of the SSSI. The operations that require 
 
1 The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 was amended by the Countryside Rights of Way Act 2000 and the Natural Environment and Rural 
Communities Act 2006. 
2 Section 28G of the Act 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
2 
Natural England’s consent (also previously referred to as ‘Operations Likely to 
Damage’ (OLDs)) are formally listed in the notification documents of each SSSI and 
are relevant to the notified features for which that SSSI has been selected.  
• 
Assents (section 28H of the Act) — issued in response to a written notice of 
proposal from a public body, such as a government department or agency, local 
authority or statutory undertaker3, requesting permission to undertake operations, in 
the exercise of their functions, which that authority considers is likely to damage a 
SSSI. On determination of the notice, Natural England may grant its assent, grant its 
assent with conditions or refuse to grant its assent if it considers that the proposal is 
not compatible with furthering the conservation and enhancement of the special 
interest of the site. 
• 
Advice (section 28I of the Act) — issued in response to a consultation from a public body 
when it is deciding whether to authorise or permit an operation proposed by others. This is 
the case whether they may permit the operations following an application required by a 
statutory authorisation regime, or whether they are acting as a SSSI landowner and wish to 
permit a third party to carry out operations on their SSSI land. Natural England may advise 
against giving permission for operations that may damage the special interest of the site or 
advise that conditions be attached to a permission to prevent or mitigate the operations 
causing damage. 
The diagram in Annex 1 illustrates the three regulatory pathways (consents, assents, and 
advice) applied by Section 28 of the Act to help protect SSSIs. GOV.UK provides further public 
guidance4. 
Who is this standard for? 
This standard has a wide audience. It is essential that the owners and occupiers of SSSIs understand 
the regulatory pathway for consent decisions under Section 28E and that public bodies understand the 
regulatory pathway for assent decisions under Section 28H and for statutory Section 28I advice.  
It will be useful for other parties to understand how to gain the necessary permissions that may be 
required when proposing to undertake events or activities on SSSI land owned by owners, occupiers, or 
public bodies. 
 
 
 
3 Examples include Environment Agency, Forestry Commission, Local Authority, utility companies, Ministry of Defence, Network Rail and 
Highways England 
4 There are two pages of public guidance that relate to the process through which SSSI owners and occupiers can give notice and apply for a 
consent decision, and the duties of public body responsibilities: Sites of special scientific interest: managing your land - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) 
and Sites of special scientific interest: public body responsibilities - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
3 
2:0 The Standard 
Natural England is committed to working closely with land managers and others (our SSSI customers) 
who wish to submit notices and seek advice concerning SSSI regulation.  
Our aim is to ensure we respond to all enquiries in a timely and efficient manner and that we explain 
the reasons for our advice and decisions clearly.  
In implementing our legal duties, we will apply the following principles: 
1. 
Ensure that customers can easily access the information on individual SSSIs that Natural 
England uses to inform its decision making 
In addition to directly providing these to owners, occupiers and public bodies when a SSSI is first 
notified, Natural England publishes the statutory notification documents for each SSSI on its website5.  
These are important references in the decision-making processes affecting SSSIs and comprise: 
• 
A Citation, which describes the special nature conservation interest for which the site has been 
selected as a SSSI 
• 
A Map showing the extent of the SSSI boundary 
• 
A List of Operations that require Natural England’s consent (‘ORNECs’) (also previously referred 
to as ‘Operations Likely to Damage’ (‘OLDs’), and 
• 
A Statement providing Natural England’s views about the management of the land which is 
necessary to conserve the SSSI. 
2. 
Encourage customers to discuss their proposals with us before submitting a notice 
We encourage our SSSI customers (owner/occupiers and public bodies) to contact us prior to 
submitting a notice to undertake activity affecting a SSSI. Owner/occupiers should only consult where 
the proposed operation equates with an operation which is described in ‘the list of operations requiring 
Natural England’s consent’ for their SSSI and where the proposed operation would be carried out within 
the boundary of the SSSI.  
Public bodies should consult Natural England where they consider that an operation would be likely to 
damage the features of special interest, whether the operation is to take place within the boundary of 
the SSSI or not.  By discussing proposed operations in advance of the submission of a formal notice, 
both parties can consider at an early stage if and how the work can be undertaken in a way that 
protects the special feature of the SSSI. 
Natural England can provide informal advice to an owner or occupier or public body about any 
proposed operations before a notice is submitted. Once notice has been given and a written proposal 
submitted, Natural England must then assess the likely ecological impacts of the operations as 
requested and described in the notice. Further dialogue with the applicant during this statutory 
determination period is limited to requests for additional information to inform the decision.  
Should the owner or occupier or public body choose to significantly change their submitted proposal, 
they can withdraw their notice at any point and Natural England can provide further advice to help 
 
5 https://designatedsites.naturalengland.org.uk 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024