5 
advice is required, the whole of this statutory period may be required.  
More complex cases can include proposals affecting those SSSIs which are also part of the National 
European Site Network7 because Natural England will also need to undertake a ‘Habitats Regulations 
Assessment’ to inform its Section 28E consent decisions. In circumstances where the Habitat Regulations 
Assessment indicates that a more detailed ’appropriate assessment’ is required it may take up to four 
months to reach a decision (see principle 6). Natural England must also ensure that its SSSI consent 
decisions do not hinder the conservation objectives for Marine Conservation Zones. 
Where Natural England concludes that the proposed operations would, if carried out, cause damage or 
disturbance to the notified features of a SSSI, it may be necessary for Natural England to attach 
conditions to a consent to prevent or mitigate such damage or disturbance or refuse to grant consent. 
Where consent is granted with conditions, or where consent is refused, then a statement clearly 
explaining our reasons for doing so will be provided.  
The applicant will be informed about their right to appeal against such decisions to the Secretary of 
State and how to lodge an appeal if they choose to. 
5. Respond to SSSI notices from public bodies in a timely and efficient manner 
A notice should be submitted in writing to Natural England’s Single Point of Contact at 
protectedsites@naturalengland.org.uk. Natural England will acknowledge the receipt of notices with 
an automated email reply. 
Public bodies should provide sufficient information about where, what, when and how the operations 
would be undertaken to enable Natural England to make a decision. Where the SSSI underpins a 
European site, there is an expectation that public bodies include a copy of their Habitats Regulations 
Assessment (as required by the Habitats Regulations 2017) that informed the development of their 
proposed operations. 
Under the provisions of the Act, Natural England has 28 days from the date on the notice to determine a 
notice for assent. On receiving a notice at the Single Point of Contact, Natural England will first check 
for any existing assents that may already authorise the proposed operations. This will prevent the 
unnecessary duplication or ‘layering’ of permissions and allow previously assented operations to 
proceed quickly. Natural England will inform the public body if they already have a permission for the 
operations that they have proposed. 
Statutory bodies requiring assent for their operations have the duty to conserve and enhance the SSSI’s 
special interest whilst exercising their functions. Where proposals do not meet with this duty, Natural 
England will inform that body as soon as possible and, where practicable, explore whether there are 
other ways in which their operations can be carried out that are more compatible with furthering the 
conservation and enhancement of the special interest of the site. 
Where Natural England concludes that the proposed operations would cause damage or disturbance to 
 
7 Sites within the National European Site Network are Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) and Special Protection Areas (SPA) designated by 
Government under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended). Wetlands of International Importance (Ramsar 
Sites) designated under the terms of the Ramsar Convention are also subject to the provisions of the Habitats Regulations as a matter of 
Government policy, although they are not legally a part of the National European Site Network 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
6 
the notified features, it may be necessary for Natural England to grant assent with conditions or refuse to 
grant its assent.  
Natural England must also ensure that any SSSI assent decisions do not hinder the conservation 
objectives for Marine Conservation Zones. 
6. 
Provide clear advice to public bodies in relation to our duties to support their decision 
making 
When a consultation for Section 28I advice has been submitted to the Single Point of Contact mailbox at 
protectedsites@naturalengland.org.uk, Natural England will acknowledge receipt with an automated 
response email.  
Local planning authorities should submit their requests for advice on planning applications to 
consultations@naturalengland.org.uk. 
Natural England will respond within 28 days of the date on a notice from a public body seeking our 
advice about whether an operation should proceed on a SSSI. Our response letter will state whether we 
consider the proposed operation to be compatible with furthering the conservation and enhancement of 
the special interest of the site.  
If we believe that this duty could be met by applying conditions, then our advice letter will include our 
reasons for this and further details about the required conditions which the public body should set 
when granting its permission. We will clearly explain the advice we have given, drawing on the best 
available evidence to determine what the potential impacts might be and if they might be mitigated. 
If a consultation does not provide adequate information, we will communicate this as early as possible to 
allow further details to be provided.  
7. Work with public bodies who decide to proceed contrary to Natural England’s assent 
decision or advice. 
Before a public body decides to proceed with operations without Natural England’s assent, or grants 
permission for operations contrary to our advice, it is required by the Act to give Natural England further 
written notice (at least 28 days if proposing to carry out their own work or 21 days if proposing to permit 
an operation). This notice should include an explanation of how it has considered any advice previously 
provided by Natural England.  
Where a public body decides to act contrary to Natural England’s advice, it is required to demonstrate 
how it has weighed the balance between differing interests, including the special interest of the SSSI. It 
should also demonstrate how it has considered alternative methods of carrying out the operations to 
minimise adverse impact. Should the public body proceed and carry out its own operations that are 
likely to cause damage, it must restore the site to its former condition, so far as is reasonably 
practicable, if any damage does occur. 
Where Natural England remains concerned about the significance of the likely impacts on a site’s 
notified features, it may consider taking further action, including a referral of the case to the Secretary 
of State. 
8. Ensure that SSSIs which are also designated as part of the National European Site Network 
series are subject to the requirements of the Habitats Regulations 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
7 
Where the SSSI is also designated as a European Site (i.e. a SAC or SPA), the Conservation of 
Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) (“the Habitats Regulations”) places additional 
obligations on Natural England when considering applications for SSSI consent.  
If, in our judgment, a proposed ‘plan or project’ (including a notice for SSSI consent) is not ‘directly 
connected with or necessary for the nature conservation management of the site’ and is ‘likely to have 
a significant effect’ on the site (either alone or in combination with other plans or projects), then it is 
mandatory that an ‘appropriate assessment’ of the proposal is undertaken to thoroughly assess the 
likely ecological impacts in more detail. Consent can only be granted by Natural England if it can be 
concluded following that assessment that the plan or project will not have an adverse effect on the 
integrity of the European site8.  
Under the Habitats Regulations, a ‘competent authority’ such as a public body must undertake its own 
Habitats Regulations Assessment to inform decision making in relation to any ‘plan or project’ that it 
wishes to undertake or adopt itself or is required to authorise.  
9. Base our decisions on the best available evidence and the likely impact of the proposed 
operation on the site’s notified features 
Natural England will consider whether each proposal is compatible with furthering the conservation and 
enhancement of the special interest of the site in accordance with its statutory duty. In undertaking this 
assessment, we will follow our Evidence Standards and use the best available evidence and our 
professional expertise and judgment.  
A key part of our evidence base will be the SSSI citation and associated documentation to identify the 
interest feature(s) that could be affected by a proposal. Staff will determine proposals and reach a 
decision considering the conservation objectives for that SSSI and the scientific evidence available 
about the ecological requirements of the affected features, together with their local knowledge of the 
site, professional expertise, and practical experience. This will be informed by specialist advice and 
opinion where required. 
Where there is evidence that a previously consented activity is no longer compatible with furthering the 
conservation and enhancement of the special interest of the SSSI, Natural England can use its powers 
under the Act to modify or withdraw an existing consent. This is subject to a right of appeal if the 
consent holder is aggrieved by that decision and compensation may be payable where the consent 
holder can show that the changes to the consent will result in a loss in the value of the SSSI land. 
10. Record all decisions to create a clear audit trail 
All notices received by Natural England will be recorded on our casework management system and all 
associated documents including unconditional, conditioned, and refused consents/assents, and advice 
to public bodies will be stored in accordance with our Records Management guidance. 
 
11. Ensure all decisions are made on a case-by-case basis and adhere to current procedures 
governing our decision making 
 
8 See Natural England’s Habitats Regulation Assessment Operational Standard: http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/publication/8740045  

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
8 
All notices of proposal submitted by SSSI owner/occupiers for a consent decision or by public bodies 
for an assent decision will be treated by Natural England on their own merits based on the detail of the 
proposal provided in the notice and its predicted impacts in relation to the SSSI’s notified features. The 
granting of a consent/assent, the refusal of a consent/assent, or the attachment of conditions to a 
consent/assent on one SSSI does not in itself set a wider precedent for others. 
Our staff will abide by Natural England’s Non-Financial Scheme of Delegations9 for issuing consents, 
assents, and advice. The Scheme describes the individual decision-making authority that Natural 
England staff have in relation to their role and grade and highlights when decisions are required to be 
agreed and endorsed by a more senior officer.  
12. Ensure that our staff have the appropriate training and support to undertake our 
responsibilities regarding consents, assents, and advice 
All staff with responsibilities for determining consents, assents, and advice notices for SSSIs will have 
received the appropriate ecological and SSSI training and have access to up to date guidance and 
support. 
 
 
9 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/975871/natural-england-non-financial-
scheme-of-delegation.pdf 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
9 
Annexes 
Annex 1: Consent (Section 28E), Assent (Section 28H) or Advice (Section 28I) 
The first step is to determine the type of notice or consultation 
 
Public body - Section 28G bodies are broadly 
defined in the Act, but specifically include the 
Secretary of State, government departments 
and agencies, local authorities and statutory 
undertakers (whether in the public sector or a 
privatised utility), and other officers appointed 
by the Crown. Examples include: Environment 
Agency, Forestry Commission, Local Planning 
Authority, Utility companies (water or 
electricity). MoD, Network Rail  
Permitting – where a public body has the power 
to grant a Permission for others to undertake 
works, e.g. EA abstraction licence, or a Local 
Authority planning permission, situations where 
a public owns land and wishes to permit a third 
party to carry out operations, situations where 
a public body intends to serve a notice under 
any regulatory regime. 
Third party/member of the public - A notice of
proposal can only be submitted by an 
owner/occupier of the SSSI. 
Where it has been confirmed that an agent is 
acting on behalf of an owner/occupier, they can 
submit a notice 
Members of the public would need to seek the
permission of the owner/occupier who in turn 
would need to seek consent. 
Undertaking – a public body carrying out its 
functions, e.g. EA undertaking flood defence 
works, or a Local Authority maintaining a right of 
way. 
Function – this is a broad definition that includes 
all the duties and powers of a public body 
including any activities it has the power to 
perform. 
Who is consulting 
Natural England? 
Public body 
(Section 28G body) 
Is the proposed operation part of the 
public body’s function(s)? 
SSSI owner or 
occupier 
Consent 
(Section 28E) 
Third party or 
member of the 
public 
Is the public body 
permitting the 
operation? 
Is the public body 
undertaking the proposed 
operation? 
No 
Yes 
Assent 
(Section 28H) 
Advice 
(Section 28I) 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024  
10 
Annex 2: A recommendation as to the information that might be included in a notice of 
proposal for proposed operations requiring SSSI consent  
Owners/ occupiers (or their nominated agents and representatives) and public bodies are required to 
submit a notice of proposed operation in writing, either by letter or email. Whatever form a notice takes, 
it must specify the nature of the proposed operations and the land on which it is proposed to carry it 
out.  
The recommended information that should be included in a notice, and a template for writing a notice, 
are both available online from the GOV.UK page ‘Give notice and get consent for a planned activity on 
a SSSI’.  
For Natural England to determine a notice, we need sufficient detail to be able to make a judgment on 
the impacts of the proposals. 
The following information should be included:  
• 
site name 
• 
name and address of applicant 
• 
a clear and detailed description of what you intend to do, and how you intend to do it 
• 
the start and end dates for the operation or activity 
the precise location of the proposed operation or activity (send a map with notes if you can)  
You should include as much relevant information about your proposal, such as: 
• 
what if any vehicles will need access to the site, the routes they’ll take and ground pressure 
they’ll exert (particularly across fens and bogs) 
• 
how you’ll remove any spoil from the site 
• 
the origin and chemical nature of any materials you’ll bring onto the site  
Natural England may contact you if it needs: 
• 
more details about your request 
• 
to clarify any issues about your request 
 

 
 
SSSI Regulation Operational Standard  
Content Owner: Director, Greener Farming and Fisheries Programme 
Content creator: Protected Sites Team (Strategy) & Legal Services 
Version 24/01/2024